Privacy Policy 
Last Updated: July 13, 2015
=========================
Your privacy is important to xxxxx. Our Privacy Policy covers how we collect, use, disclose, transfer, and store your information. We hope our policy is straightforward and easy-to-understand. Please take a minute to review the details of our privacy practices below.

Collection and Use of Non-Personal Information
We may collect non-personal information, such as data that does not allow direct association with any specific individual. Non-personal data is collected, used, transferred, and disclosed for a number of purposes. These purposes include the use of cookies and other technologies that give us a better understanding of our users' needs. A "cookie" is a small data file that is stored on your device. Most Internet browsers automatically accept cookies. We use information collected from cookies to improve users' experience and the overall quality of our services.

Collection and Use of Personal Information / Content
Personal information may be collected in a number of ways when you use any of the products or services offered by xxxxx. We may prompt you to voluntarily provide information, including personal information. For example, we may ask to collect your name, email address, user name, telephone number and credit card number whenever you register for an account, purchase our products, or contact us via email.

From time-to-time we may also collect personal information you provide in connection with your participation in surveys, sweepstakes, contests, promotional offers, and other activities on the site.

When you use our email support services, we collect your correspondence in order to build up a public knowledge base, which will be available to all users of the site. Your correspondence will most likely not be used verbatim, but paraphrased in an FAQ format.

We use the information collected through xxxxx products: (I) to communicate with you; (II) to process your requests and transactions; (III) to improve the site; (IV) to customize the services and/or products we provide to you; (V) to assist with our product and service development; (VI) to perform marketing analysis; and (VII) for other purposes related to our business.

The images you upload to xxxxx for editing will not be stored unless your request a link to revisit your works or you actually request a xxxxx service that requires storage of this image (e.g. to temporarily save the unfinished works under your xxxxx account).

If you are using xxxxx Market Service to share / sell your photo works, refer to clause "3 xxxxx's Use" of the "xxxxx Market Terms" in the "Terms of Services" for detailed information on how we handle these images.

Transparency and Choice
You may configure your browser to block cookies, including cookies associated with our services. However, many of our services may not function correctly with cookies disabled. You can also control which social websites you upload images to. 
 
Third party accounts
xxxxx does not store your Facebook, Twitter, or Flickr passwords. Your account information is not disclosed to xxxxx and you are free to cancel any of your social networking website connections with xxxxx at any time.

Enforcement
We regularly review our own compliance with our Privacy Policy. If you submit a formal written complaint, we will contact you and try our best to resolve the issue.

Changes
Our Privacy Policy may change occasionally. We will not reduce your rights under this Privacy Policy without providing explicit, advanced notice. We will post any privacy policy changes on this page and, in the event of significant changes, we will provide a more prominent notice (such as an email notification). We will also archive prior versions of this Privacy Policy for your review.


If you have any questions regarding this Privacy Policy, please feel free to contact us(Support@xxxxx.com).


