Experts say the error is an opinion that fires are not really anyone's fault. That is not so in other countries, where both public education and the law treat fires as either a personal failing or a crime. Japan has many wood houses; of the 48 fires in world history that burned more than 10,000 buildings, Japan has had 27. Punishment for causing a big fire can be as severe as life imprisonment.

In the United States, most education dollars are spent in elementary schools. But, the lessons are aimed at too limited a number of people; just 9 percent of all fire deaths are caused by children playing with matches.

The United States continues to depend more on technology than laws or social pressure. There are smoke detectors in 85 percent of all homes. Some local building laws now require home sprinklers . New heaters and irons shut themselves off if they are tipped.
Today is the date of that afternoon in April a year ago when I first saw the strange and attractive doll in the window of Abe Sheftel's toy shop on Third Avenue near Fifteenth Street, just around the corner from my office, where the plate on the door reads. Dr Samuel Amory. I remember just how it was that day: the first sign of spring floated across the East River, mixing with the soft - coal smoke from the factories and the street smells of the poor neighbourhood. As I turned the corner on my way to work and came to Sheftel's, I was made once more known of the poor collection of toys in the dusty window, and I remembered the coming birthday of a small niece of mine in Cleveland, to whom I was in the habit of sending small gifts. Therefore, I stopped and examined the window to see if there might be anything suitable, and looked at the collection of unattractive objects--a red toy fire engine, some lead soldiers, cheap baseballs, bottles of ink, pens, yellowed envelopes, and advertisements for soft - drinks. And thus it was that my eyes finally came to rest upon the doll stored away in one corner, a doll with the strangest, most charming expression on her face. I could not wholly make her out, due to the shadows and the film of dust through which I was looking, but I was sure that a deep impression had been made upon me as though I had run into a person, as one does sometimes with a stranger, with whose personality one is deeply impressed.